<!-- include the Font Awesome library, per: https://fontawesome.com/start -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://use.fontawesome.com/releases/v5.7.2/css/all.css">

## Introduction

This document presents a typeface that reproduces the appearance of the Roman cursive in its ancient version. It is modeled on the letters read on wooden tablets found during excavations in `Vindolanda`{.lightblue} [@isbn:9781873136874]:

> The anaerobic conditions at the Roman fort of Vindolanda, close to Hadrian's Wall in northern Britain, have famously preserved a variety of finds made of organic materials, including wooden writing tablets and a pair of leather boxing gloves. 
[@doi:10.15184/aqy.2023.11]

The most famous is [tablet 291](https://romaninscriptionsofbritain.org/inscriptions/TabVindol291) with a birthday invitation from Claudia Severa. Her letters are mainly used as a model for the font.

> The elegant script in which this letter is written is also probably to be recognised in 243, 244 and 248. The letters are slim, with marked ascenders and descenders, and very little use of ligature. [@{https://romaninscriptionsofbritain.org/inscriptions/TabVindol291}]

The goal of the font is to combine the specificity of lettering in handwritten documents with the beauty of regularity in the typographic era. In this sense, the task of creating a font is similar to the one pursued in the creation of the antiqua. In the era of creating typefaces for early book printing, typographers also focused on how letters were handwritten, but the letters were uniform and didn't look too varied. 

Vindolanda font is a modern sans-serif font that is designed in a unified style. Its character is determined by the antiquity and manuscript character of the prototype @fig:letter-forms, and at the same time by the opposite trend: the modern appearance of mass-produced fonts.

![
**Letter-forms in the tablets.**
Image ownership: © Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies.
](./images/fig11.gif){#fig:letter-forms}


B. Voronetsky and E. Kuznetsov say on ancient Greek writings:

> It is unusually simple, built sparingly clear lines of uniform thickness. [@voronetsky-kuznetsov]

I'm aiming for the same stylistic guidelines when I'm working on the Vindolanda font.

They also write about the Latin font: 

> Roman font was not something uniform and constant: it was noticeably modified and existed in various forms. 
> Its basic and original form is the capital font (lat. *caitalis* -- large, main, solid), also called majusculus (lat. *majusculis* -- somewhat larger), because it consists exclusively of capital (large) letters. An inscription made by majusculus is placed strictly between two horizontals, without a single line going beyond the line formed by them. 
> Majuscule is, first of all, the font of solemn writings carved on columns, triumphal arches and walls. (...) Its technology (...) is careful slow carving in a stone slab along a predetermined contour. (...) He is clear, harmonious and stately. (...) Another variant of the handwritten Latin writing was cursive (lat. currêre -- to run; running, means slanted). In cursive, letters were simplified, joined together, and lost some details. Quickness was achieved at the cost of loss: clarity, clarity, beauty suffered. Therefore, italics (in its various forms) was used only for business records and letters.

Vindolanda returns clarity and precision of Greek writings to Roman cursive.

Thus, it is not necessary to appeal to modernity to justify the need for this typeface.

In addition to the letters of the Latin alphabet, the font contains the letters of the Cyrillic alphabet and the extended Cyrillic alphabet for minor languages such as Bashkir, Tatar and Udmurt. These letters were created for entertainment purposes and have no historical basis. They represent only my fantasies on how the Cyrillic alphabet based on Roman cursive could have been look like. Nevertheless, the Cyrillic letters are based on the Latin letters in one way or another. How they were designed is explained in a special section in this document. 

This fancy Cyrillic was created out of a desire to make the typeface more usable and out of a desire to popularize the Roman cursive lettering.

The font can be used for more authentic reproduction in books and on websites of texts written in Roman cursive, as well as for educational purposes to practice reading texts written in Roman cursive. The font can also serve as a secret spelling for kids who want to start their own private club, like in the "Dead Poets Society" movie.

[
<i class="fas fa-scroll fa-lg"></i> **Lingua Latina**<br>
Vindolanda est typus aperti fontis et liber qui formas litterarum in manuscriptis Latinis, quae durante excavations in castris auxiliariis Romanis in Anglia septentrionali inventae sunt, reproducit. Plurimae litterae in hoc fonte scribendi exempla ex tabulis ligneis Vindolandae, id est, cursivum Romanum antiquum, imitantur, sed in stricte moderno sans-serif, quod permittit originalitatem litterarum in documentis manuscriptis cum pulchritudine regularitatis in aetate typographica coniungere. Typus adhiberi potest ad veram reproductionem in libris et in paginis interretialibus textuum in cursivo Romano scriptorum, necnon ad usus educativos ad exercitandum legendi textus in cursivo Romano scriptos. Litterae maiusculae et minusculae non distinguuntur.
]{.banner .lightgrey}

## The shape of the letters

### Overview

Traditionally, letters are drawn on the background of a grid of 16 squares proposed by A. Dürer to show their correct proportions @fig:grid. But the very nature of cursive contradicts this idea.


![
**Letter F in Vindolanda.**.
](./images/grid.png){#fig:grid}

Vindolanda is a disproportionate, fractured typeface in which the free spirit of hand-drawn letters is slightly reduced to the order we know from book printing. And it is in these fractured lines that the archaic beauty of this typeface lies. The result is something between ancient runes and the constructed writings of space civilizations in sci-fi movies @fig:overview.

![
**Letter permutations, a fragment.**
](./images/overview.png){#fig:overview}

### Letters

Let's compare original letters from Vindolanda and letters from Vindolanda fontface, starting with the letter `A`{.grey} @fig:a.

![
**Letter A from tablet and from the fontface.**
](./images/a.png){#fig:a}

One of the most unlike letters we're used to @fig:b.

![
**Letter B from tablet and from the fontface.** Very vertical with a stand-alone element.
](./images/b.png){#fig:b}

It was very important to keep the angle of the stem @fig:c. Through such lettering, we better understand the history of letters. The `C`{.grey} was not always rounded. It was written in two linear movements. In cursive, this method is captured.

![
**Letter C from tablet and from the fontface.**
](./images/c.png){#fig:c}

The letter `D`{.grey} had to be modified a bit to keep the overall character and uniformity of the font, it became more like `A`{.grey} and `B`{.grey} @fig:d. 

![
**Letter D from tablet and from the fontface.**
](./images/d.png){#fig:d}


![
**Letters from tablet and from the fontface.** 1/3
](./images/letters1.png){#fig:letters1}

Sans-serif fonts are not only sans serif. They also tend to have stems, hairlines and bars of equal thickness. In general, this rule is followed, except for the letter `L`{.grey}, in which the seal in the crossbar emphasizes the origin of the letter from handwriting.

![
**Letters from tablet and from the fontface.** 2/3
](./images/letters2.png){#fig:letters2}

It was a challenge not only to draw the letter `Q`{.grey}, but even to find it on tablets from Vindolanda [@wikidata:Q1153229]. It is [here](https://romaninscriptionsofbritain.org/inscriptions/TabVindol139), but it is very different from the other lettering. I had to change the appearance of the letter and adjust it to the general character of the font @fig:q.

![
**Letter D from tablet and from the fontface.**
](./images/q.png){#fig:q}

Letters `U`{.grey} and `V`{.grey} are the same.

![
**Letters from tablet and from the fontface.** 3/3
](./images/letters3.png){#fig:letters3}

The letters `Z`{.grey} and `Y`{.grey} are very rare, I have not been able to find them on Vindolanda tablets. But I was able to find one use of the letter `X`{.grey} @fig:x. They all came into the Latin alphabet from the Greek alphabet, and letters in Vindolanda did not need scholarly Greek words. Letters were used to solve everyday problems there. 

![
**Letter X from tablet and from the fontface.**
](./images/x.png){#fig:x}

## Kerning

Not only should the letters be similar to the original writing, they should also look good next to each other, without leaving gaps or overlapping. Kerning is used for this purpose. The appearance of the letters is different from the usual ones, so regular kerning pairs could not be used.

The following letter combinations require kerning:

1. `E`{.lightyellow}
    a. O
    b. L
    c. R
    d. N
    e. S
2. `F`{.lightyellow}
    a. O
    b. M
    c. C
    d. S
    e. V
        i. U
    f. I
    g. G
3. `R`{.lightyellow}
    a. O
    b. A
    c. I
    d. E
    e. V
        i. U
    f. M
    g. N
    h. Q
    i. D
4. `C`{.lightyellow}
    a. O
    b. L
    c. I
    d. N
    e. M
    f. V
        i. U
        ii. W
    g. R
    h. S

Also `K`{.lightyellow}, `L`{.lightyellow}, `I`{.lightyellow} and other need kerning.

## Examples

Typically, fonts are demonstrated using pangrams. But is there a pangram for Latin? This is a bit of a complicated question, internet users try to answer it [here](https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/550/is-there-a-latin-version-of-quick-brown-fox). Let's take advantage of their findings @fig:pangram.

![
**Latin pangram.** Sic fugiens, dux, zelotypos quam Karus haberis.
](./images/pangram.png){#fig:pangram}

> The translation I see floating around the internet is odd, though:
> _Thus fleeing, O leader, you are regarded with jealousy like Karus._

And one more @fig:grm2.

![
**Latin pangram.** Sic tibi rex iuvenis gracili ore piloque Kalendis / hac forma lyrica littera quaeque datur.
](./images/grm2.png){#fig:grm2}

> Free translation:
> *Young king with simple face and hair, this is how you are given every letter through this lyrical form on the first day of the month.*

Now let's try to type an original birthday invitation from Vindolanda's tablet @fig:severa. See original [here](https://romaninscriptionsofbritain.org/inscriptions/TabVindol291).

![
**Birthday Invitation of Sulpicia Lepidina.**
](./images/severa.png){#fig:severa}

## Cyrillic

I have no idea what Cyrillic characters might look like in this font. The Slavs would not have a written language until 700 years later. Although there is a place in the Slavic area with similar soil features [@doi:10.1080/00665983.2021.1949148] that allow ancient manuscripts to be preserved for archaeologists [@isbn:9789004389403], the writing technique in Novgorod was different: in Vindolanda they wrote with ink on wooden tablets, while in Novgorod the letters were scratched into the bark of the tree [@isbn:9789004362383]. Therefore, direct analogies in the appearance of letters are impossible. So it's all pure fantasy @fig:cyr. 

![
**Fantasy Cyrillic.**
](./images/cyr.png){#fig:cyr}

`В`{.lightgreen} in the mirror image of `Б`{.lightgreen}, `Г`{.lightgreen} goes back to `С`{.lightgreen}, as it has historically, `Д`{.lightgreen} is two mirrored `G`{.lightgreen}'s, the other letters are simply drawn in single sharp strokes.

## License and terms of use


[
<i class="fas fa-info-circle fa-lg"></i> **License and terms of use**<br>
Vindolanda is absoltely *free and open*. Moreover, you can not only use the font (including for commercial purposes), but also [work with the sources](#download) and modify it. 
]{.banner .lightblue}

## Download

- [OTF file](https://github.com/nevmenandr/vindolanda/raw/main/Vindolanda-Regular.otf "OTF file"){.button}
- [TTF file](https://github.com/nevmenandr/vindolanda/raw/main/Vindolanda-Regular.ttf "TTF file"){.button}

## Source project

The font is made in [Glyphr studio](https://www.glyphrstudio.com/app/). You can [download the project sources](https://github.com/nevmenandr/vindolanda/blob/main/Vindolanda-Regular%20-%20Glyphr%20Studio%20Project.gs2) and work with them yourself.

## Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Maria Timoschuk, who introduced me to the Vindolanda tablets, and who supports me in my interest in Latin.

## My other fonts

<i class="fas fa-font"></i> [18cent](https://nevmenandr.github.io/18cent-font/) A typeface based on a historical typeface used in 18th century typography, but was sought after as an illustration of brokenness and lack of mental balance in the credits of a movie about [Tchaikovsky's wife](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt17538510/).

<i class="fas fa-font"></i> [Font and writing system for a constructed language for the birthday of M. Daniel](https://github.com/nevmenandr/artlang-dani-el?tab=readme-ov-file#%D1%88%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%84%D1%82)

